# IN BRIEF

2047. The moral life is a spiritual worship. Christian activity finds its nourishment in the liturgy and the celebration of the sacraments.

2048. The precepts of the Church concern the moral and Christian life united with the liturgy and nourished by it.

2049. The Magisterium of the Pastors of the Church in moral matters is ordinarily exercised in catechesis and preaching, on the basis of the Decalogue which states the principles of moral life valid for every man.

2050. The Roman Pontiff and the bishops, as authentic teachers, preach to the People of God the faith which is to be believed and applied in moral life. It is also encumbent on them to pronounce on moral questions that fall within the natural law and reason.

2051. The infallibility of the Magisterium of the Pastors extends to all the elements of doctrine, including

moral doctrine, without which the saving truths of the faith cannot be preserved, expounded, or observed.

The Ten Commandments

Exodus 20 2-17

I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a graven image, or any likeness

of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the

earth; you shall not bow down to them or serve them; for I the LORD your God am a jealous God,

visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and the fourth generation of those

who hate me, but showing steadfast love to thousands of those who love me and keep my

commandments.

You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless

who takes his name in vain.

Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days you shall labor, and do all your work; but the

seventh day is a sabbath to the LORD your God; in it you shall not do any work, you, or your son, or

your daughter, your manservant or your maidservant or your cattle, or the sojourner who is within your

gates; for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the

seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.

Honor your father and your mother, that your days may be long in the land which the LORD your God

gives you.

You shall not kill.

You shall not commit adultery.

You shall not steal.

You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.

You shall not covet your neighbor's house; you shall not covet your neighbor's wife, or his manservant

or his maidservant or his ox, or his ass, or anything that is your neighbor's.

Deuteronomy 5:6-21

I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt out of the house of bondage.

You shall have no other gods before me . . .

You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain . . .

Observe the sabbath day, to keep it holy. . .

Honor your father and your mother . . .

You shall not kill.

Neither shall you commit adultery.

Neither shall you steal.

Neither shall you bear false witness against your neighbor.

Neither shall you covet your neighbor's wife .

You shall not desire . . . anything that is your neighbor's.

A Traditional Catechetical Formula

1.. I am the LORD your God: you shall not have strange Gods before me.

2.. You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain.

3.. Remember to keep holy the LORD'S Day.

4.. Honor your father and your mother.

5.. You shall not kill.

6.. You shall not commit adultery.

7.. You shall not steal.

8.. You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.

9.. You shall not covet your neighbor's wife.

10.. You shall not covet your neighbor's goods.

 

[previous](https://github.com/Tenari/non-fiction/blob/master/catechism/__P76.md) | [next](https://github.com/Tenari/non-fiction/blob/master/catechism/__P78.md)